Effekt by example (#536)
effekt-lang/effekt: examples/features/adts.effekt.md

# Algebraic Datatypes

Defining a datatype in Effekt is similar to other languages.

```
type FileSystem {
  File(name: String, content: String)
  Directory(name: String, children: List[FileSystem])
}
```

> Each definition starts with the `type` keyword and is followed by the name of the datatype. Enclosed by curly braces
> and separated by newlines, variants consisting of a name and optional fields can be defined.
> 
> Creating instances of this datatype functions just as you might expect:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A datatype definition starts with the `type` keyword and is followed by the name of the datatype. 
Variants are enclosed by curly braces and separated by newlines (or semicolons) and consist of a name and a (non-optional) list of fields.

Constructing values of this datatype works as you might expect:
```

```effekt:repl
val file = File("README.md", "Effekt")
```

Even though, each variant looks like a record here, selectors like with records do not work here.

```effekt:repl
file.name // fails
```

Instead, pattern matching has to be used.

```
def containsFile(fs: FileSystem, name: String): Bool =
  fs match {
    case File(name1, _) and name1 == name => true
    case Directory(_, children) => 
      children.any { c => containsFile(c, name) }
  } else { false }
```

> A pattern match with `match` consists of one or more clauses delimited by `case`. There is an exhaustivity check such 
> that you need to handle all cases of the scrutinee. Pattern guards, starting with `and`, can be used to refine matches
> with further conditions that evaluate to a `Bool`. Optionally, like with `if` expressions, a `match` expression can be 
> followed by an `else` branch. Instead of an `else` branch in a `match` expression, you may also use a wildcard pattern
> (`case _ => ...`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A pattern match (initiated with the keyword `match`) consists of one or more clauses delimited by `case`. 
There is an exhaustivity check helping you to handle all cases of the scrutinee. 
Pattern guards, starting with `and`, can be used to refine matches with further conditions that evaluate to a `Bool`. 
Optionally, like with `if` expressions, a `match` expression can be followed by an `else` branch to provide a default case. 
Instead of an `else` branch in a `match` expression, you may also use a wildcard pattern
(`case _ => ...`).
```

# Algebraic Datatypes

Defining a datatype in Effekt is similar to other languages.

```
type FileSystem {
  File(name: String, content: String)
  Directory(name: String, children: List[FileSystem])
}
```

Each definition starts with the `type` keyword and is followed by the name of the datatype. Enclosed by curly braces
and separated by newlines, variants consisting of a name and optional fields can be defined.

Creating instances of this datatype functions just as you might expect:

```effekt:repl
val file = File("README.md", "Effekt")
```

Even though, each variant looks like a record here, selectors like with records do not work here.

```effekt:repl
file.name // fails
```

Instead, pattern matching has to be used.

```
def containsFile(fs: FileSystem, name: String): Bool =
  fs match {
    case File(name1, _) and name1 == name => true

>     case Directory(_, children) => 

Author: I am not exactly sure what you mean. The body of each arm may be a single expression or a statement delimited by curly braces. So what you are describing should work unless I misunderstood your remark. Feel free to elaborate in this case

>     case Directory(_, children) => 

Author: That is, you also could have written `{ true }` as the first match arm's body.

>     case Directory(_, children) => 

Reviewer 2: see #422, I don't think the new parser resolved this

>     case Directory(_, children) => 

Author: Ha, thanks. I would have expected this to work. This should be easy to support if we want to.

>     case Directory(_, children) => 

Author: Ha, thanks. I would have expected this to work. This should be easy to support if we want to.

      children
        .map { child => containsFile(child, name) }
        .foldLeft(false) { (lhs, rhs) => lhs || rhs } 
  } else { false }

> ```

Reviewer 2: Nitpick: This is not a bad example per se, but I dislike the `.map( <recurse> ).foldLeft(false) { _ || _ }` as a pattern here -- the actual operation here is `.filter( <recurse> ).nonEmpty` or even just `.any {  <recurse> }` from the standard library ;)

A pattern match with `match` consists of one or more clauses delimited by `case`. There is an exhaustivity check such 
that you need to handle all cases of the scrutinee. Pattern guards, starting with `and`, can be used to refine matches
with further conditions that evaluate to a `Bool`. Optionally, like with `if` expressions, a `match` expression can be 

> followed by an `else` branch.

Reviewer 2: Question: Is it worth it to also showcase the other way of a default match (`case _ => ...`) here, or is it truly obvious that it exists?

```effekt:repl
containsFile(Directory("/", file), "README.md")
```
Furthermore, you can use partial matches in positions where a `Bool` is expected, like here:

```effekt:repl
if (file is File(_, _)) println("it's a file!")

> ```

Reviewer 2: Here I'd really like to see an example that actually _uses_ the newly bound value somehow -- perhaps by printing its name or the content length or something?

Author: Yes, good idea! I didn't even know the fields are bound here :)

Reviewer 2: It's very much like Rust's `while let` and `if let` :)
